feat: meshstack_building_block resource + meshstack_building_blocks data source (building block v3) (#208)
meshcloud/terraform-provider-meshstack: docs/resources/building_block.md

---
# generated by https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-docs
page_title: "meshstack_building_block Resource - terraform-provider-meshstack"
subcategory: ""
description: |-

>   Manage a workspace or tenant building block using the meshBuildingBlock v2-preview API transport.

Author: f: schema docs should not mention API explicitly, as TF provider aims to hide api versioning concerning resource design. see also other places with similar issue in docs and fix this up.
```suggestion
  Manage a workspace or tenant building block created from a building block definition.
```

      }
      size = {
        value = jsonencode(16)
      }
      environment = {
        value = jsonencode("dev")
      }
      # Sensitive inputs are supplied under `sensitive` and never stored in plaintext: the value is
      # encrypted to the runner's public key and only its sha256 hash is surfaced in `all_inputs`.
      api_key = {
        sensitive = {
          secret_value = "super-secret-api-key"
        }
      }
    }
  }

  # create/update wait for the building block run to reach a terminal state; delete waits for
  # deprovisioning. Tune to your runner's typical run duration (defaults to 30m if unset).
  timeouts = {
    create = "30s"
    update = "30s"
    delete = "30s"
  }
}
```

<!-- schema generated by tfplugindocs -->
## Schema

### Required

- `spec` (Attributes) Building block specification. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--spec))

### Optional

- `purge_on_delete` (Boolean) When true, deletes via the `DELETE /{uuid}/purge` sub-path, which requires admin authority (`ADM_BUILDINGBLOCK_DELETE`). This is a last resort option for stuck deletions.
- `timeouts` (Attributes) (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--timeouts))

> - `wait_for_completion` (Boolean) Whether to wait for the building block to reach a terminal state (SUCCEEDED or FAILED) before completing create/update operations. The provider emits actionable warnings if the run is blocked in `WAITING_FOR_OPERATOR_INPUT`. Deletion always waits for the block to be fully removed (lifecycle DELETED, or gone after a purge) regardless of this flag, so dependent resources such as the building block definition can be deleted safely afterward.

Author: mention timeouts here but also see my comment regarding deletion timeout there.

### Read-Only

> - `all_inputs` (Attributes Map) Computed read-only view of all inputs. Shows the plain value for non-sensitive inputs or the hash for sensitive inputs. Set values for them in `spec.inputs`. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--all_inputs))

Author: f: explain here that "all" means platform operator, user inputs and static inputs and other sources. 

note the relation to the other attribute `inputs` which only defines the inputs managed by this resource, and that operators manage `inputs` only for platform operators  / (inderitcly static ones via bbd as well) without managing the whole resource usually (typical cross workspace app teams are managing the BB lifecycle, with the exception that operators create BB from draft BBds for testing). This situation could be explained in a bit more detail as part of the resource description, but don't become too chatty / stay succinct.

- `metadata` (Attributes) Building block metadata. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--metadata))
- `status` (Attributes) Current building block status. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--status))

<a id="nestedatt--spec"></a>
### Nested Schema for `spec`

Required:

- `building_block_definition_version_ref` (Attributes) References the building block definition version this building block is based on. Changing the `uuid` upgrades the building block in place. Only upgrades to the **latest released version** of the same definition are supported; pointing at an older or non-released version is rejected by the backend. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--spec--building_block_definition_version_ref))
- `display_name` (String) Display name for the building block as shown in meshPanel. Changing it is applied in place (a rename) and does not trigger a building block run.

> - `inputs` (Attributes Map) Input values for this building block. Normal app-team users only provide `USER_INPUT` inputs here. `PLATFORM_OPERATOR_MANUAL_INPUT` only makes sense when a platform operator creates a BB from a BBD in the same workspace (e.g. to test a draft BBD before release), using an API key with sufficient permissions; providing an operator input with a non-operator/non-owner API key is rejected with a clear error. Set either `value` using `jsonencode(...)` or `sensitive = { secret_value = ... }`. Use the `sensitive` block if and only if the BBD declares the input as sensitive — a mismatch in either direction is rejected by the backend. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--spec--inputs))

Author: use paragraphs with `<br/>` (check how other longer descriptions are made). stay succinct regarding BBD sensitive requirement (it's clear that its a bug and consider starting with this instead of the appteam/operator distinction)

- `target_ref` (Attributes) References the building block target. For `meshTenant` targets, `uuid` is required and `name` must be omitted. For `meshWorkspace` targets, `name` is required and `uuid` must be omitted. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--spec--target_ref))

Optional:

> - `parent_building_blocks` (Attributes Set) List of parent building blocks. Parent building blocks can only change as part of a version upgrade; changing them on their own forces the building block to be replaced (destroyed and recreated). (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--spec--parent_building_blocks))

Author: d: this description could include that parent relations should align with inputs whose values are taken from output of the BB of that parent. this is also a general concept of BBs that they can build a dependency hierarchy. think about adding this to the BB description as well, or look up and include reference docs such as https://docs.meshcloud.io/concepts/building-block/ focus on the more technical aspects when it comes to managed BBs as code with TF here.

<a id="nestedatt--spec--building_block_definition_version_ref"></a>
### Nested Schema for `spec.building_block_definition_version_ref`

Required:

- `uuid` (String) UUID of the building block definition version. Must reference the latest released version of the definition when upgrading.

Optional:

> - `content_hash` (String) Content hash of BBD version. If changed, triggers a new run of the building block. After `terraform import`, the first apply triggers a run if `content_hash` is set in config (because import leaves it null in state). To avoid an unexpected run after import, either omit `content_hash` from config until after the first post-import apply, or set it only after the import completes.

Author: please validate if that statement is actually true from code and ensure that in code, it's mentioned that content_hash description mention this (cross link). also, focus on the fact that content_hash only exists to detect changes in draft BBDs to concentiently re-run a BB. it can also be "misused" to trigger a rerun manually, but that should be used with care and needs run_transparency AFAICT to trigger with mere app team permission (BB_SAVE unprefixed for single workspace, no ADM / MANAGED)

Author: Validated against code: `content_hash` is Terraform-only and a content_hash-only change forces a run via the trigger-run endpoint. Reframed the description (detect draft-BBD content changes + manual-rerun-with-care) and added the run-transparency note — a plain workspace key (`BUILDINGBLOCK_SAVE`) needs the BBD's run transparency enabled; admins and the definition's operator are exempt.

<a id="nestedatt--spec--inputs"></a>
### Nested Schema for `spec.inputs`

Optional:

- `sensitive` (Attributes) Sensitive input value. Use `secret_value` for create/rotate and `secret_version` to control updates. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--spec--inputs--sensitive))

> - `value` (String) Non-sensitive input value. Use `jsonencode(...)` for non-string values.

Author: f: this is not quite right, as even string values must be `jsonencode`, see BBD description and compare. fix BBD description if it's also not clear there. also, the general description of the BB resource should mention that it's similar to how the BBD inputs are defined (but BBD is a bit more complex concerning default values etc.)

<a id="nestedatt--spec--target_ref"></a>
### Nested Schema for `spec.target_ref`

Required:

- `kind` (String) Target kind for this building block, one of `meshTenant`, `meshWorkspace`.

Optional:

- `name` (String) Identifier (name) of the target workspace. Required when `kind = "meshWorkspace"`, must be omitted for `kind = "meshTenant"`.
- `uuid` (String) UUID of the target tenant. Required when `kind = "meshTenant"`, must be omitted for `kind = "meshWorkspace"`.

<a id="nestedatt--spec--parent_building_blocks"></a>
### Nested Schema for `spec.parent_building_blocks`

Required:

- `buildingblock_uuid` (String) UUID of the parent building block.
- `definition_uuid` (String) UUID of the parent building block definition.

<a id="nestedatt--timeouts"></a>
### Nested Schema for `timeouts`

Optional:

- `create` (String) A string that can be [parsed as a duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) consisting of numbers and unit suffixes, such as "30s" or "2h45m". Valid time units are "s" (seconds), "m" (minutes), "h" (hours).

> - `delete` (String) A string that can be [parsed as a duration](https://pkg.go.dev/time#ParseDuration) consisting of numbers and unit suffixes, such as "30s" or "2h45m". Valid time units are "s" (seconds), "m" (minutes), "h" (hours). Setting a timeout for a Delete operation is only applicable if changes are saved into state before the destroy operation occurs.

Author: f: i don't understand the part bout to what that timeout applies. why not simply make that timeout for delete operation itself and if it times out, the resource gets removed from state but it errors with a clear warning that managed resources might be left over?

Author: Replaced the generic framework blurb with what the timeout actually bounds: the deprovision wait (async destroy run, or removal after a purge); on timeout the apply errors and keeps the resource in state for retry. Your 'remove from state + warn on timeout' idea is a behavior change — tracked as a proposal; I'd keep the safer retain-and-error default (it protects dependent deletes), so leaving it as a possible opt-in later.

<a id="nestedatt--all_inputs"></a>
### Nested Schema for `all_inputs`

Read-Only:

- `assignment_type` (String) How the input value is assigned. Either `USER_INPUT` or `PLATFORM_OPERATOR_MANUAL_INPUT`.
- `sensitive` (Attributes) Sensitive input value. (see [below for nested schema](#nestedatt--all_inputs--sensitive))
- `value` (String) Non-sensitive input value. This is a `jsonencode`d representation, for example `"my-name"` for a string or `16` for an integer.
- `value_type` (String) Data type of the value. One of `STRING`, `CODE`, `INTEGER`, `BOOLEAN`, `FILE`, `LIST`, `SINGLE_SELECT`, `MULTI_SELECT`.

<a id="nestedatt--all_inputs--sensitive"></a>
### Nested Schema for `all_inputs.sensitive`

Read-Only:

- `secret_hash` (String) Hash value of the secret stored in the backend. If this hash has changed, the secret was changed externally.

<a id="nestedatt--metadata"></a>
### Nested Schema for `metadata`

Read-Only:

- `owned_by_workspace` (String) The workspace containing this building block.
- `uuid` (String) UUID which uniquely identifies the building block.

<a id="nestedatt--status"></a>
### Nested Schema for `status`

Read-Only:

> - `force_purge` (Boolean) Indicates whether an operator has requested purging of this Building Block.

Author: investigate again if exposing this in the tf repo makes sense (find out in backend what this flag actually indicate validated by understanding the code). also relate this to the purge_on_delete flag, which should at least be mentioned if we keep exposing this flag for now. main quesion is is there a difference between force purge and the purge on delete functionality? It might be that purge_on_delete can only be done by platform operator? also then renaming this to simply `purged` is better as a status field (also align backend then), this is similar to the lifecycle status which becomes DELETED even if it was purged (so resources went unmanaged, no destroy run triggered for BB)

Author: Improved the description and related it to `purge_on_delete`. Verified in backend: the force-purge endpoint currently requires `ADM_BUILDINGBLOCK_DELETE` only. Your `purged` rename + allowing `MANAGED_BUILDINGBLOCK_DELETE` (operator owning the BBD) is tracked as a meshfed-release proposal (separate commit + test + release note).
